# **Investigating the Atmospheric Impact of Disturbances in Land Cover: A Study of Precipitation and Temperature Changes in post-fire landscapes**


**Supervisors**: Vasco Mantas (UC/CITEUC) / Courtney Schumacher (Texas A&M University)

### Abstract
The PhD research will address for the first time the impacts of post-fire events and the dynamics of Land Cover and Land Use Changes (LCLUC) on regional temperature and precipitation patterns by combining several remotely sensed data such as Landsat/Sentinel-2 and Sentinel-1, GMP and SMAP, ground-truth, and artificial intelligence algorithms for a comprehensive analysis of the feedback and interaction processes between surface and atmosphere. The findings of these interactions, atmosphere and land cover, will enable a new understanding of post-fire landscapes and contribute to an informed post-disaster recovery process.

### State of the art
Human actions are driving significant changes in land cover, intensifying climate change challenges and posing critical threats to communities and ecosystems [1]. These changes arise from various processes and drivers, operating at different scales [1]. It is crucial to capture these diverse processes explicitly in space and time to support scientific and societal applications that go beyond mere geographic representation of disturbances [2]. Moreover, studies like [3] and [4] have revealed that regional-scale and large-scale tropical deforestation can result in substantial reductions in average precipitation and higher surface temperatures across all regions.
Wildland fires offer a unique chance to study the role of abrupt land cover change, gradual recovery, and the establishment of new equilibria. Satellite remote sensing provides valuable data on fire location, magnitude, and recovery ([5], [6]). Research has focused on direct and indirect impacts, including air and water quality deterioration and compound disasters linked to fire landscapes [7]. However, post-fire surface-atmosphere interactions are largely unexplored, separate from fire weather. Land cover affects precipitation patterns and the performance of climate models (e.g., [8]), yet our knowledge of post-fire feedbacks is limited. Surface roughness, albedo, emissivity, wind, and soil moisture changes have significant direct and indirect effects on precipitation [9]. These processes, operating at various scales, require disentanglement for a better understanding of land use and land cover's role in feedback mechanisms.
The knowledge gaps extend to the very understanding of product performance in such areas, where the disturbances create challenging conditions for commonly used algorithms [10]. This gap, undermines a clear understanding of how fire landscapes influence regional temperature and precipitation patterns and work to amplify or alleviate droughts/flooding and vegetation recovery/replacement. With climate change enabling more frequent and catastrophic fires, the role of post-fire landscape weather research may only become more relevant, and part of the planning towards more resilient ecosystems and communities. 
The 2017 fires in Portugal covered 442,418 hectares [11], resembling events in California, occurring in similar climate zones but in different pre-fire landscapes. Studying burn scars and their regeneration can provide insights into post-fire precipitation and temperature dynamics at local to regional scales. Leveraging the development of remote sensing missions such as Landsat, GPM, and SMAP and retrieval techniques, satellite-based remote sensing will provide the data needed to determine the contribution of different surface and atmospheric variables to the complex processes of precipitation generation and recycling [12].
In this project, we will design an innovative framework to characterize and quantify the impact of wildland fires, and the slow regeneration/transitions of post-fire landscapes over the local and regional precipitation and surface temperature patterns. To do so, a complex set of information from different missions will be acquired and processed using traditional and machine-/deep-learning for a comprehensive analysis of the feedback processes.
Objectives
General objective: Characterize and quantify the impact of wild fires, and regeneration of post-fire landscapes on surface-atmosphere interactions, with a focus on precipitation and surface temperature.
Specific objective 1: Design a framework and processing chain to accurately characterize burn scars for surface-atmosphere interactions (including ground validation of the used satellite products).
Specific objective 2: Characterize surface temperature and soil moisture (local to regional) in post-fire landscapes.
Specific objective 3: Characterize precipitation feedbacks on post-fire landscapes and its impact at a micro and mesoscale (1-1000 km) scale.

### References
- [1] Li, J.; Li, Z.L.; Wu, H.; You, N. Trend, seasonality, and abrupt change detection method for land surface temperature time-series analysis: Evaluation and improvement. Remote Sens. Environ. 2022, 280, 113222.
- [2] Mantas, V.; Fonseca, L.; Baltazar, E.; Canhoto, J.; Abrantes, I. Detection of Tree Decline (Pinus pinaster Aiton) in European Forests Using Sentinel-2 Data. Remote Sens. 2022, 14.
- [3] Wang, X., Cong, P., Jin, Y., Jia, X., Wang, J., Han, Y. Assessing the Effects of Land Cover Land Use Change on Precipitation Dynamics in Guangdong–Hong Kong–Macao Greater Bay Area from 2001 to 2019. Remote Sensing. 2021; 13(6), 1135. 
- [4] Pal., S., Ziaul, Sk. Detection of land use and land cover change and land surface temperature in English Bazar urban center. The Egyptian Journal of Remote Sensing and Space Science, 20 (1), 2017, 125-145.
- [5] Boschetti, L., Roy, D. P., Giglio, L., Huang, H., Zubkova, M., & Humber, M. L. (2019). Global validation of the collection 6 MODIS burned area product. Remote Sensing of Environment, 235(February), 111490.
- [6] Quintano, C., Fernandez-Manso, A., & Roberts, D. A. (2017). Burn severity mapping from Landsat MESMA fraction ima-ges and Land Surface Temperature. Remote Sensing of Environment, 190, 83–95.
- [7] Wagenbrenner, N. S., Chung, S. H., & Lamb, B. K. (2017). A large source of dust missing in particulate matter emission inventories? Wind erosion of post-fire landscapes. Elementa, 5.
- [8] Saavedra, M.; Junquas, C.; Espinoza, J.; Silva, Y. Impacts of topography and land use changes on the air surface temperature and precipitation over the central Peruvian Andes. Atmos. Res. 2020, 234, 104711.
- [9] Graf, M.; Arnault, J.; Fersch, B.; Kunstmann, H. Is the soil moisture precipitation feedback enhanced by heterogeneity and dry soils? A comparative study. Hydrol. Process. 2021, 35, 1–15.
- [10] Ermida, S. L., Soares, P., Mantas, V.M., Göttsche, F. M., & Trigo, I. F. (2020). Google earth engine open-source code for land surface temperature estimation from the landsat series. Remote Sensing, 12(9), 1–21. 
- [11] ICNF, 10 º Relatório provisório de incêndios florestais, 2017, Accessed June 2023 at https://www.icnf.pt/api/file/doc/2c45facee8d3e4f8.
- [12] Shen, Z., Yong., B. Downscaling the GPM-based satellite precipitation retrievals using gradient boosting decision tree approach over Mainland China. Journal of Hydrology, 602, 2021, 126803.
